---
title: Abbott et al. 2015, PLOS One
author: Rebecca Hayes
date: '2022-02-03'
slug: abbott-et-al-2015-plos-one
categories:
  - competition
tags:
  - RebeccaHayes
  - competition
---

# Title: Spatial Heterogeneity in Soil Microbes Alters Outcomes of Plant Competition

# Who they are:  
Karen Abbott is a theoretical ecologist at Case Western Reserve University, and she co-directs their IRIHSE Program, which includes paid summer research opportunities for CWRU undergraduates from groups historically underrepresented in science.  
  
# What they did:  
They use modeling to understand the effect spatiotemporal differences in soil mutualists and seed dispersal on competition between plants that are either responsive or non-responsive to such soil mutualists. They use the model to consider scenarios of invasion and succession. For the invasion scenario, they look at California grassland communities where native plants outcompete invasives in the presence of native AM fungi, but are outcompeted in their absence, to test whether the conditions that lead to invasion are impacted by plant dispersal between microbe-containing and microbe-free areas. For the succession scenario, they use their model to examine whether positive plant-soil feedbacks generated by differences in responsiveness to soil mutualists in a patchy distribution can explain patterns of replacement during early succession, or whether other plant or soil traits also play a role.  

# What they found:  
There were three possible outcomes of the model:   
1) From all initial conditions, the non-responsive (NR) plant excludes the responsive (R) plant everywhere on the landscape   

2) The NR plant excludes the R plant everywhere on the landscape from some initial conditions, otherwise the R plant excludes the NR plant everywhere  

3) The NR plant excludes the R plant from some initial conditions and otherwise the two plants coexist in both patches  

When a community is dominated by native R plants, microbe-rich areas represent sources where population exponentiates while microbe-absent areas represent sinks, where the R plants are completely excluded by NR plants. The opposite is true for NR introduced plants. 

# Why it matters:  
Their work provides evidence of microbial-mediated alternative stable states in plant communities with implications for landscape-level patterns of community types. Restoration and conservation decisions should be made with incorporating information about whether native plants are microbe responsive and the implications for introduced plants with different types of microbial responsiveness. Based on these metrics, different community types have different levels of reliance on microbial mutualists and thus different risk level to replacement by introduced species, so this can help to decide prioritization in conservation actions. 

[Link to Paper](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0125788)